# Methods

## Soil and site description

The study area is located on the Hamakua coast in the northern part of the island of Hawaii, along an elevation gradient of approximately 600 to 1300 m (Figure 1). The study area receives mean annual rainfall ranging from 695 to 2590 mm and the mean annual temperature ranges from approximately 15 to 19 °C [Citation26]. As elevation increases, precipitation and temperature decrease throughout the site. Soils are volcanic ash-derived, overlying lava flows that occurred 64,000 to 300,000 years ago, and are classified either as Hydrudands or Hapludands (Table 1). A managed Eucalyptus grandis forest (referred to hereafter as “eucalyptus forest”) of approximately 2600 ha (19˚58′N, 155˚30′ W to 20˚02′N, 155˚27′W) was converted from kikuyu and pangola grass pasture (referred to hereafter as “pasture”) and planted with E. grandis between 2001 and 2005. The afforested area was ripped to a depth of 18 to 24 inches (approximately 45 to 60 cm) and mounded with a disk plow to prevent air pockets in the seedling root zone. Six permanent sample plots (PSPs) in the eucalyptus forest have been continually monitored by Forest Solutions, Inc., since establishment. Measurements such as diameter at breast height (DBH, 1.4 m above soil) and total tree height have been taken annually for every tree in each of the 18 × 18 m PSPs. Resulting from this continual measurement, tree growth and yield for E grandis on this site is well understood and these PSPs serve as the basic experimental units for the eucalyptus forest plots in this study.

In 2011, six 18 × 18 m plots were established in pastureland adjacent to the eucalyptus forest plots at approximately equal elevation and in the same soil series (Table 1). The pasture plots were selected in areas that were relatively flat or gently sloping, to most closely match the eucalyptus forest plots. Higher elevation pastures are dominated by kikuyu grass (Cenchrus clandestinus), a common perennial C4 grass that is naturalized in Hawaii [Citation27], and pangola grass (Digitaria eriantha). Aboveground biomass of grazed kikuyu grass is approximately 2 Mg ha−1 [Citation28]. At lower elevations, guinea grass (Megathyrsus maximus, previously Urochloa maxima and Panicum maximum), a productive and highly invasive species that is increasingly common in Hawaii, dominates and was present only in the lowermost site. Guinea grass live biomass ranges from 0.85 to 8.66 Mg ha−1 on Oahu [Citation29]. Cattle are currently grazing all pasture sites.

Estimates of forage production at the pasture sites were derived using the Hawaii Forage Production Estimator tool [Citation101]. Monthly forage supply for each plot (Mg dry matter ha−1) was calculated based on monthly average rainfall values [Citation26] (Table 1). Production values were then used to estimate the aboveground and belowground biomass C and annual root input. First, annual biomass production was multiplied by 0.50 to convert biomass to C. When these pastures undergo grazing, the cattle generally remove approximately 50% of the standing biomass [Thorne M, State Range Extension Specialist in the Kamuela Extension Office on the Island of Hawaii, Pers. Comm.]; therefore, aboveground biomass C of grazed pastureland was estimated by taking 50% of the production values. Root mass C was calculated as 80% of C in aboveground biomass [Citation30]. Grasses typically turn over 30% of their root mass annually [Citation30], which may be compounded by grazing. Here, grazing was considered to be 50%; therefore, an additional 2% loss was added to the natural die-off estimate of 30%, then multiplied by the root mass to get root litter input [Citation101].

To enable the comparison of soil C stock and dynamics between the soils of the paired eucalyptus forest and pasture plots, the following was assumed: past land use was the same before the establishment of eucalyptus forest (both the pasture and eucalyptus are located on land that was converted from native forest dominated by Metrosideros polymorpha and Acacia koa 50–80 years ago); the soil series is the same for each of the pairs; thus, parent material, mineralogy, regional topography and weathering are equivalent; the elevation, precipitation and temperature are comparable; and local topography is similar, as all plots are located on flat to gentle slopes.

## Above- and belowground biomass and carbon

Aboveground (ABG) biomass and C were computed from the measurements of tree height and DBH taken in 2011. EquationEquation (1) was used to calculate ABG biomass:
(1)
where ABGtotal is the total dry weight of aboveground biomass in kg; DBH is diameter at breast height (1.4 m) in cm; and H is height in meters [Citation31]. This equation was developed in Hawaii from the destructive harvest of E. grandis on the islands of Hawaii and Kauai. To convert to C, the ABG was multiplied by 51.1%, the C content of the eucalyptus trunk [Citation102]. Belowground C (i.e., root biomass C) was calculated as 20% of ABG biomass C [Citation32–34]. No shrubs and little to no ground cover other than sparse invading grasses were present.

## Soil C Stock

Soil cores were taken from five points (the four corners and the center of a square) in each of the 18 × 18 m plots. This design was based on intensive sampling of one test plot, from which it was determined that the sample data were independent at distances ≥ 10 m [Citation35]. Five 1-m soil cores were taken per plot in 18-cm depth increments using a slide hammer corer of 4.39 cm diameter. The soil samples were split in half vertically, weighed and stored in a freezer. Half of the core was used to compute C stocks and the other half was used for soil fractionation. Bulk density was calculated from the mass of the entire core. Soils were oven-dried at 105 °C, sub-sampled, homogenized, ground to pass through a 250-µm sieve and analyzed for C content by elemental analysis (Costech Inc., CHN Analyzer).

Soil C stock (g cm−2) was computed by two methods. The first method (see EquationEquation 2) multiplied the C concentration by bulk density:
(2)
where Db is the bulk density (g soil cm−3 on a dry weight basis); Lcore is the length of the core (18 cm per section of the profile); %C is the concentration of C (g C 100 g soil−1), and n is the number of soil cores. The C stocks calculated from the five sample cores in each plot were averaged and used to calculate one value for the amount of soil C per hectare for each site.

Although the method employing EquationEquation (2) has been the convention for many years, this technique does not take into consideration compaction, expansion or erosion [Citation36]. As a result, the fixed-depth method consistently overestimates organic C stocks [Citation37]. A more rigorous method gaining recognition for quantifying C stocks is the equivalent soil mass (ESM) method. This methodology estimates C stocks using cumulative mass coordinates as opposed to spatial coordinates. By the theory presented in Wendt and Hauser [Citation37], a fitted curve, in this case a quadratic polynomial, was used to calculate the organic C mass in a reference soil mass (see supplemental Figure 1).

Initially, the soil C stock was calculated by both methods to determine whether a difference existed between the two values for this system. Following the initial assessment, the remaining analyses and comparisons were conducted using the second, equivalent soil mass method.

## Statistical Analysis

Paired Student's t-tests were used to compare means of pasture versus eucalyptus plots for total C stock as well as C stock, bulk density and C concentration at each depth. The variance in C stock between the six pasture plots as well as between the six eucalyptus plots was calculated to compare variability within and between sites.

## Life-Cycle Analysis

Turn et al. [Citation38] performed a net energy analysis on the E. grandis production system practiced in Hawaii with a system boundary defined as the edge of the forest (Figure 2). Mass and energy flows crossing this boundary were inventoried over a 7-year production rotation and unit factors were applied to convert mass and energy flows to a common energy basis, MJ ha−1. This life-cycle inventory served as the basis for calculating the global climate change impacts of anthropogenic activities. The analysis was performed using SimaPro software by PRé Consultants (Anon. 2008) [Citation103] and utilized the US Life-Cycle Inventory [Citation104], life-cycle analysis (LCA) Food Database [Citation105] and EcoInvent Version 2 [Citation106] databases. The Tool for the Reduction and Assessment of Chemical and other environmental Impacts 2.1 (TRACI 2.1) was used to calculate global climate change potential that includes the effects of other greenhouse gases (e.g. CH4, N2O, etc.). TRACI 2.1, developed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), utilizes calculation methodology provided by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Citation39,Citation40].
