# Material and methods

## Study sites

The study sites were along an elevational gradient (670 to 1450 m) within the Honaunau Forest on the southwestern slopes of Mauna Loa, island of Hawaii (Fig. 1).
Annual precipitation in the Honaunau Forest ranges from about 2600 mm at the lowest elevation to 1200 mm at the top of the forest (Kamehameha Schools Bishop Estate, unpublished data).
Approximately 35% of the total rainfall occurs in the summer, and the driest period lasts from October to December.
Mean daily temperature ranges between 19 and 14°C across the gradient, with low seasonal variations.

The study area contains stony, well-drained organic soils (Histosols), developed on both rough (aa) and smooth (pahoehoe) lava flows, which are about 1200 and 2400 years old, respectively, and volcanic ash soils (Andisols), overlying lava flows up to 13 000 years old (J. Lockwood and F. Trusdell, unpublished geologic maps).
The organic soils were classified as Lithic (on pahoehoe) and Typic (on aa) Tropofolists and the volcanic ash soils were classified as Typic and Lithic Hapludands [@Sato1973].
The Andisols under the study plots were about 50 cm deep on pahoehoe and had high organic C content and almost no stones.

At high elevation, mixed stands of *A. koa* and *F. uhdei* arose when *A. koa* regenerated spontaneously shortly after *F. uhdei* was planted in 1959 after the land was cleared.
Initially, *F. uhdei* grew poorly and *A. koa* seedlings originating from the seed bank colonized the site.
*Acacia koa*, a shade-intolerant (as an adult), pioneer species in disturbed sites, dominated *F. uhdei*, a relatively shade-tolerant species, in the mixed stands.

## Weather data

Three weather stations were installed in clearings at 700, 1050, and 1400 m elevation.
We recorded rainfall with a TE525 tipping bucket rain gage (Texas Electronics Inc., Dallas, Tex., U.S.A.), global solar radiation with a LI-200 SZ pyranometer (LI-COR Inc., Lincoln, Nebr., U.S.A.), and air temperature and relative humidity with a HMP35C probe (Vaisala Inc., Woburn, Mass., U.S.A.).

All sensors were sampled at 15-s intervals and hourly averages were stored in dataloggers (Model CR21, Campbell Scientific Inc., Logan, Utah, U.S.A.).

## Biomass, productivity, and LAI estimates

We set up 0.03 to 0.12 ha circular plots, within single-species and mixed *F. uhdei* – *A. koa* stands (Table 1).
Stand age was available from the landowner’s records.
Each tree stem was marked with a permanent marker at 1.37 m above ground and all subsequent diameter measures were done on the marks with a diameter tape.
Stem diameter (DBH) of all trees within each plot was measured at 6-month intervals from May 1995 to June 1997, and stand basal area was calculated by summing the individual tree basal areas.
Total tree height was recorded with a Haga altimeter at the start of the study, on a fraction of trees within each plot.
Litter fall within each plot was collected approximately monthly, during 26 months with four 0.18-m$^2$ litter traps and sorted into foliage, twig (<1 cm diameter), and reproductive components.

We calculated aboveground net primary productivity (ANPP) as the sum of litter fall and biomass increment estimated from stem diameter increments by biomass allometrics.
Allometric equations for both total biomass and leaf area of *F. uhdei* were generated by harvesting 14 trees within a stand, at mid-elevation along the gradient (Table 2).
The harvested trees ranged from 7.7 to 44.2 cm in DBH and 10.0 to 31.5 m in height.

Each stem was separated into wood and a combined leaf and twig (<1 cm diameter) component and these portions were weighed in the field.
Subsamples of the combined fraction were separated into twigs and leaves and the ratio was used to estimate twig and leaf biomass per tree, as described by [@Harrington1993].
The equations were corrected for logarithmic bias [@Sprugel1983].
For large trees, the stem volume up to 10 cm top diameter was estimated using Smalian’s formula [@Avery1975] and the dry weight was then calculated as the product of stem volume and stem specific gravity, which was determined on stem samples from each tree.
To estimate total aboveground biomass per tree (*B*, kg) of *A. koa*, we used the equation (P. Scowcroft, U.S. Forest Service, unpublished data)

[1] $$B = 0.102 \times \text{DBH}^{2.33}$$

LAI of *F. uhdei* was calculated by using the allometric equations.
For *A. koa*, LAI was calculated by using the allometric equations derived from two separate harvests on the island of Hawaii (P. Scowcroft, U.S. Forest Service, unpublished data).
We estimated leaf area per tree (LA; m$^2$) with a two-step procedure that consists in calculating (1) tree sapwood area (SW; cm$^2$) from tree basal area (BA$_t$; cm$^2$) and (2) leaf area per tree from sapwood area as follows:

[2] $$SW = 2.38 \times \text{BA}_t^{0.779}$$
[3] $$LA = 0.061 \times \text{SW}^{1.17}$$

We also optically estimated LAI from nine points within each plot, by using a LI-2000 plant canopy analyzer (LI-COR Inc., Lincoln, Nebr., U.S.A.) [@Welles1991] on September 1996.
Optical measures of LAI agreed very well with allometric estimates in all the stands (*r$^2$* = 0.93, *P* = 0.0001 for the linear relationship between allometric and optical LAI), except for a 66-year-old stand for which allometrics provided unreasonably high estimates of LAI.

## Foliage and soil analysis

We sampled fully expanded *F. uhdei* leaves from the uppermost part of the crowns of at least five trees, at each plot during mid-season in 1995.
Freshly fallen leaf litter was also collected by laying shade clothes on the forest floor.
Both foliage and fresh litter samples were separately composited to make up a single sample from each plot.
The leaf area of fresh samples was measured with a LI-3100 area meter (LI-COR Inc., Lincoln, Nebr., U.S.A.).
The foliage and fresh litter samples were dried at 70°C to constant weight and ground to pass a 1-mm sieve.
Dry weights of foliage samples were used to determinate specific leaf mass (g·m$^{–2}$).
Foliar samples were then analyzed for total N by a micro-Kjeldahl procedure [@Nelson1972], for P, Ca, Mg, K, S, Fe, Mn, Mo, Cu, Zn, and Na by inductively coupled plasma emission spectroscopy [@Isaac1983], and for B with the azomethine-H method [@Wolf1974].

Fraction nutrient resorbed (FNR) was calculated as 1 – the quotient of nutrient/Ca ratios in senesced leaves and in fresh leaves, [@Vitousek1986] to account for mass losses during senescence.

Foliage samples were reground with a mortar and pestle and sent to the Duke University Phytotron Facility in Durham, N.C., U.S.A. for δ$^{13}$C analysis.
After combustion of samples in a NA 1500 elemental analyzer (Carlo Erba, Milan, Italy), natural abundance of $^{13}$C/$^{12}$C ratios were measured on a SIRA Series II mass spectrometer (VG Isotech, Middlewich, U.K.) operated in automatic trapping mode.
The reference CO$_2$ calibrated against standard Pee Dee belemnite was obtained from Oztech (Dallas, Tex., U.S.A.).

We also collected soil samples to the 15 cm depth, from eight positions selected at random along two transects (N–S and E–W) in each plot.
The soil samples were composited for each site and then analyzed for organic C by chromic acid digestion and spectrophotometric methods [@Heanes1984], for total N by micro-Kjeldahl, for K by Technicon continuous-flow flame-emission spectrophotometry, and for P, Ca, and Mg by inductively coupled plasma emission spectrometry.

## Nitrogen fertilization experiments

We set up two fertilization experiments: one in a *F. uhdei* stand at 1300 m elevation and the other in a *F. uhdei* – *A. koa* stand at 1400 m elevation.
Both stands were on Histosols on the same lava flow and in close proximity to single-species stands at high elevation.
Each experiment was set up as a randomized complete block design with four replicates.
Blocks were arranged to control for the general slope of the site.
Nitrogen treatments were zero N and 500 kg N·ha$^{–1}$·year$^{–1}$.
The high N dose was chosen to be likely large enough to increase soil N availability.
Nitrogen was applied as urea split into three applications on 200-m$^2$ circular plots.
Growth and LAI measurements were taken from the central 100 m$^2$ of the plots.
Litter fall was collected approximately monthly from four 0.18-m$^2$ litter traps.
Stem diameter and LAI (with LI-2000) were measured before fertilization and at 12 and 18 months thereafter.
We performed fixed model *F* tests on the treatments and significance was determined with α = 0.05.
Statistical tests were done on log-transformed data to homogenize variance.

## Estimates of E, ε, and resource use

Growth efficiency was calculated as

[4]     $$E(\text{Mg}\cdot\text{m}^{-2}\cdot\text{year}^{-1}) = \frac{2(\text{ANPP})}{\text{LA}_2+\text{LA}_1}$$

where ANPP is aboveground net primary productivity in Mg for the 2-year measurement period, and LA$_2$ and LA$_1$ (m$^2$) are allometric stand leaf area at the end and the beginning of the measurements, respectively.

To achieve independent measures of ε, photosynthetic photon flux density was measured in each plot at about 40 cm above ground by six randomly distributed LI-190SB quantum sensors (LI-COR Inc., Lincoln, Nebr., U.S.A.).
Photosynthetic photon flux density was recorded at 15-s intervals and averaged over 60-min intervals with a datalogger.
Understory vegetation, mainly *Cibotium* spp. (tree fern), was pruned to prevent interference with the measurements.
The fraction light transmitted was calculated by dividing the total amount of light measured in each plot by the incident radiation during about 2-week measurement periods.
Global incident radiation in MJ·m$^{–2}$ for each site was estimated by interpolating data from the weather stations.
Fraction of absorbed radiation was calculated as 1 – the fraction light transmitted.
We calculated ε by dividing ANPP by absorbed radiation in each plot.

Nitrogen-use efficiency was calculated as ANPP divided by the amount of foliage N.
The δ$^{13}$C value for each stand was used as an integrative index of WUE.